---
title: "What I learnt as a new Developer"
tags: productivity other
---

I had just made the transition into becoming a software developer. I am just about at my two month mark with my current company and within this short time have learnt so much. A central theme to my learnings is that working in a software team is largely based upon soft-skills like communication and timing. As an outsider or even as a software engineer for that matter, we fall into a trap in believing that software engineers only solve problems behind the computer screen -- NOT TRUE. I would say working alongside other people is the biggest skill to have.    
### 1. Do not transfer complexity 

Whether you are conversing with a co-worker or reporting to your superior, do not transfer your complexity to them. What does this actually mean? This goes back to the adage of TMI. Software engineering is already complex as it is; if you are a person who likes to vomit out everything they know -- it is time to stop. This was my bad habit. I think the worse version of all this is to seek help from people when you yourself do not truly grasps the problem at hand. This happened to me once with my CTO and, although we reached the root of the issue, it became apparent that there was a slight loss-in-confidence of my communication skills. Since then I have tried to re-align with my communication. The commonplace tips still hold, e.g. listen to the question, slow down, draw a diagram when you can. But, I believe the most useful tip is to use 2 sentences to clarify anything. Obviously, don't see this as a hard limit. If you try to keep explanations to two sentences, it will force you to include basic context, like what is the MAIN problem which is missed out a lot.    

### 2. Go to work early 

I used to have a high school teacher, Dr Dillow. He was my school's director of studies and was one of the most efficient people that I know of.
Dr Dillow told me that every morning that he would wake up early and finish all of his administrative work before school even started; that way he could continue his day stress free. Although I may honestly admit Dr Dillow's schedule as an extreme one, there are elements of it worth imitating. 1), there are many benefits of working early in the morning 1) As Daniel Pink said, it is the best time for doing deliberative work (Software engineering). 2) With nobody around, I have room to focus, furthermore, I would be lying if being work before otherse does not give me a boost of esteem and confidence. Now I try to be the earliest to get to work. That way I can finish the required work sooner and leave space for more innovative and enjoyable work.  

### 3. Reduce friction when setting-up 

Ask any software engineer. The process that takes the most time when starting on a new project is in getting a workflow set up. Can you run the app? Can you test the app? Can you connect to the required databases? Do you have all the access keys? Do you have a particular version of a dependency installed? The setup phase always takes too much time. And it takes an even longer time trying to set it up by yourself. What I have learnt is not carry that "I'm a software engineer pride" by always wanting to figure things out by myself. Rather just ask your colleague who has used it to help you get it running. Sure given enough time, with some googling you would be able to resolve it by yourself. But, by that time your brain would have lost capacity and stamina to pursue the real work.   

### 4. Finish tasks fast, improve later 
I'd like to think that I am conscientuous about my work. This means that I love to go through great lengths to deliver the best work that I can. This also means that I tend to take a longer time at work than others. There are two key problems at play here: 1) The rate of business demands are faster than the rate developers can build at a high quality 2) Perception of time is weighted higher than quality of work. These are my imperative conclusions (they may very well be wrong). Of course, competency and proficiency play a big role too. I chose to include this lesson because it is more true than not. Point 1) is undisputable, I worked in two tech companies all my life and engineers just never meet deadlines. There are tons of supporting evidence to back this up. Point 2), in order to "appear" competent as a software engineer, your supervisor has to feel your ability to ship code and this feeling is usually indicated by your speed of delivery. Notice also that most work happens at the tail-end of the work cycle. From my experience, my over-planning and over-idealisation of a solution to a problem rarely comes to fruition (at least rarely) and I find myself settling for the most obvious solution. This is not to say that we should never swing for the fences and try to squeeze out quality, I think there has to be a hedging mechanism. Back to point 2), now if you go through the process of over-planning and fail, it is really difficult to justify that work has been done because planning is not concrete evidence of work. Planning increases the time it takes for you to discover a bug in your implementation; you would not have otherwise identified a key problem without getting your hands dirty and digging into the code. But, if you finish fast you can always reflect upon your solution and find ways to improve it while having the safety-net that you have already finished your work FAST. 

### 5. Write things down 

The most common occurence when I work is that I lose track of what I did or why I did it. This is where writing can truly help. Not only does it help you structure your thoughts and prepare you for outward communication, but it also helps you with memory retention. This is why design docs exist in large corporations; so that other people can understand what you are proposing and so that you yourself can have a reference to your original idea. Particularly, writing also enhances understanding of a foreign concept. Since I started my job, I have been refreshing my knowledge on Haskell and find great benefit in just writing out terminology and examples. Going back to my previous point about other people's perception of your work; writing is a great way to morph your intangible research effort into proven delivered work.  


### 6. Always focus on improving

Last but not least, be the shepherd of your own learning and development. I have came to realise that companies are not designed to support your learning. That is fundamentally not their focus. All companies want to deliver better products and that is why they hire you in the first place. I am fortunate enough to find a company which has medium to high regard for my development, but this is not the situation for every developer. If you prime yourself for only delivering task, in the next 10 years, you may be locked in to tech stack that is outdated and miss out on newer technologies like ML or Quantum Computing. Furthermore, the sensation of progress is what keeps a developer from burning out. I'd recommend developers to never compromise their improvement and development.    
